--Enable FastPass with Okta Verify-----
Okta FastPass delivers seamless passwordless authentication on
supported devices and platforms, letting users access their applications 
without entering passwords. Through a one-time setup with Okta Verify,
users gain secure, frictionless access to all their SAML, OIDC, and
WS-Fed apps from any location or network.

Okta Verify is a mobile authenticator app that provides secure MFA for
your Okta account. It offers multiple authentication methods
including push notifications, time-based one-time passwords (TOTPs),
and biometric verification.

FastPass is Okta Verify's passwordless authentication feature that
transforms your device into a security key. When enabled, FastPass
creates a strong user and device binding, establishing a secure 
passwordless connection. Once configured on a supported device
(Windows, Android, macOS, or iOS), users can access their SAML,
OIDC, or WS-FED applications without passwords. FastPass uses a 
combination of device signals and biometric verification to securely 
authenticate you, providing a seamless yet secure authentication 
experience.

Okta verify
   okta push [push]
   okta fastpass [biometric]
   okta TOTP [timebound otps]

okta fasttpass suppots [check okta folder in MIX folder for clear table]
  device assurance signals
  device managment attestation

FIDO2 (Fast Identity Online 2.0) is an open standard for user authentication that uses public key cryptography to replace passwords. Key features of the YubiKey include:
•Phishing resistant.
•Hardware protected.
•Device bound.

When using a passcode on the device, these authenticators satisfy the Possession and Knowledge factor types. 
When using a fingerprint or face ID on the device, these authenticators satisfy the Possession and Biometric factor types.

FIDO2 and Okta FastPass meet the criteria for NIST Authenticator Assurance Level 3.
Low risk (Level 1)
  Single-factor authentication
Medium risk (Level 2)
  Two-factor authentication:
  software OTP authenticator + memorized secret
  OR
  software push authenticator + associated biometric
High risk (Level 3)
  Level 2 requirements + hardware multifactor cryptographic authenticator

Set up
Now that you understand what Okta Verify and FastPass are, let's get started with the setup process.

Install Okta Verify
The first step is installing Okta Verify on your mobile device.

Enable FastPass
With Okta Verify installed on your device, we can now enable FastPass.
This is done through the Okta Verify Enrollment policy in your Okta 
admin console. Let's watch how to configure these settings.

authentication : TOTP, push notification. Okta FastPass
Self-service recovery ( push notification only)

okta verify config option
-signin page option check box : show the "Sign in with Okta Fastpass"

user verification : preferred(default), required
  preferred : biometrics prompted but not enforced
  required: biometrics prompted and enforced

Configure FastPass authentication settings
After enabling FastPass in the Okta Verify Enrollment policy, 
you'll need to configure when and how FastPass can be used.
This is managed through your Authentication Policies and Global 
Session Policy.

In the Authentication Policy, you can specify FastPass as an 
authentication factor and set conditions for its use. 
Common configurations include:

-Setting FastPass as the primary authentication method.
-Using FastPass in combination with other factors for step-up authentication.
-Specifying device and network conditions where FastPass can be used.
For example, you might configure your policy to:
-Allow FastPass authentication from managed devices only.
-Require additional verification for high-risk applications.
-Set different authentication requirements based on user location or network.


--------Set Up YubiKey as a FIDO2 Authenticator------------
Keep your organization safe by using a YubiKey to ensure you are
protected from security breaches such as phishing attacks
or other threat actors.

Understanding FIDO2 YubiKeys
FIDO2 (Fast Identity Online 2.0) is an open standard for user authentication that uses public key cryptography to replace passwords. Key features of the YubiKey include:
•Phishing resistant.
•Hardware protected.
•Device bound.


FIDO2 creates unique cryptographic keys for each service. 
Unlike passwords or codes that can be intercepted and reused, 
FIDO2 uses public-key cryptography where the private key never
leaves the YubiKey.

Unlike the SMS codes or authenticator apps that got compromised in
that breach, your YubiKey creates unique signatures each time you 
authenticate, and the private key never leaves the physical device
that sits on your keychain. When you tap your YubiKey, it uses
public-key cryptography to prove your identity. Your key stores a 
secret private key that signs a challenge from the website, while 
the website uses a public key to verify it's really you. This makes
it mathematically impossible for attackers to fake your identity
without physically stealing your key.

Implementing FIDO2 YubiKeys
-Add FIDO2 authenticator
  As with any authenticator, it needs to first be configured in the Admin Console.
-Add authenticator enrollment policy
  Specify the enrollment policy for the new authenticator.
-Create authentication policy
  Enforce the use of FIDO2 YubiKeys for all of your users when they authenticate
  in Okta based on the time frame you decide.

https://help.okta.com/en-us/content/topics/security/mfa/yubikey.htm

-directroy->people->user->more actions-> enroll FIDO2 security key-> register
-accept ok and next steps at the endpoint end

----------configure okta fastpass-----------

inWorld Global just experienced a major phishing attack that successfully breached critical systems. It was caught and mitigated quickly, but they need to enforce phishing-resistant authentication and remove reliance on passwords to meet regulatory compliance.

They have a complex environment that includes both managed and unmanaged devices. Let's look at how they can deploy Okta FastPass across their organization to eliminate passwords without compromising security. 
benefits of Okta FastPass
-Phishing-resistant authentication: You can configure constraints in your authentication policies to enforce phishing-resistance, hardware protection, and user interaction to ensure secure authentication.
-Passwordless authentication: Okta FastPass leverages Okta Verify with biometrics to eliminate the need for passwords. This provides user-friendly authentication while reducing the risk of security incidents.
-Device assurance signals: For increased security, you can use device assurance policies to configure access to resources based on device attributes, such as operating system and patch version. For example, you can create a policy that denies access if a device was jailbroken or not encrypted.
﻿-Device management attestation: Okta integrates with device management to deploy both the software and a management secret or certificate to the device. This allows Okta to attest that a device is managed by the organization.
-EDR signals: Okta integrates with Endpoint Detection and Response (EDR) tools to process trust signals. Authentication policies receive trust signals via Okta FastPass, such as risk scoring or anti-virus status. The policies can allow or deny access based on these signals.

Device registration with Okta Verify
-To provide phishing-resistant, passwordless authentication, Okta FastPass leverages Okta Verify (which implements a unique key that’s bound to the device). 
  Users must install the latest version of the Okta Verify app on their device. When a user adds an account to Okta Verify, Okta Verify enrolls the user’s device in the Okta org. This registers the device by creating a link between the device and a specific Okta user account.
-Device registration binds a device to the Okta Verify app instance on the device. It provides the organization with visibility into which devices are accessing their systems.

Step1: configure okta verify enrollment settings
To use Okta FastPass, users must install the latest version of Okta Verify and set up an account to enroll the device in Okta. As the admin, you need to determine how users can enroll in Okta Verify.
1 Go to Settings > Authenticators.
2 For Okta Verify, select Actions > Edit to modify the Okta Verify settings.
3 Choose the allowed methods.
To ensure that users enroll in Okta Verify using a phishing-resistant method, select Higher security methods.
﻿With this option, users can't enroll with a QR code, email, or SMS link.
4 Choose whether users must enable device passcode or biometric confirmation when enrolling their Okta Verify account.
   As a best practice, require users to enable biometrics for their Okta Verify account.
5 save changes

Step 2: Configure authenticator enrollment policies
To ensure that users are enrolled in Okta Verify, add an authenticator enrollment policy that requires enrollment in Okta Verify.

Step 3: Configure the global session policy
In the global session policy, defer the user session and MFA requirements to the authentication policy.

Step 4: Enable Okta FastPass
1 Go to Settings > Authenticators.
2 For Okta Verify, select Actions > Edit to modify the Okta Verify settings.
3 Enable Okta FastPass and display the button.
4 Save the changes.

Step 5: Configure authentication policies
You need to add rules to authentication policies to enforce the use of Okta FastPass. 
You can configure phishing-resistant constraints in your authentication policy rules.
A phishing-resistant authenticator requires public key cryptography.
An authenticator that’s hardware protected requires that keys used to authenticate are stored in secure hardware (TPM or Secure Enclave) on the device.
As a best practice, require biometric user verification when a user authenticates with Okta FastPass.

