----------Explore Okta Single Sign-On----------

Okta Single Sign-On (SSO) provides a simplified sign-on experience
that increases productivity and security. With SSO, users can access
multiple apps through a single Okta session.

When a user signs in to Okta, Okta authenticates the user
using one set of credentials. After successful authentication,
the user can access multiple apps without having to re-enter their
credentials.

Identity federation
-Identity federation allows a user's identity information to be 
used across multiple systems and domains by establishing a trust
relationship. Identity federation allows a user to authenticate in 
one system or domain and access resources in another system or domain
without having to reauthenticate.
-With identity federation, Okta must establish a trust relationship
between an app and Okta. When a user signs in to Okta using their
credentials, they can access the app without needing to reauthenticate.
-Okta supports these SSO methods for identity federation. Select each
card to learn more.

Security Assertion Markup Language (SAML)
-Authentication protocol that uses XML to pass identity data between 
an identity provider and  a service provider
OpenID Connect (OIDC)
-Authentication protocol that uses a JSON Web Token (JWT) to pass 
identity data between an identity provider and a service provider
Web Services Federation (WS-Fed)
-XML-based protocol used to sign in to legacy Windows-based web
apps and Microsoft Office 365

What if my app doesn't support federated SSO?
Some apps don't support federated SSO. Instead, they rely on basic
authentication with a username and password. For these apps, Okta
offers a proprietary SSO method called Secure Web Authentication (SWA).

When using SWA, Okta securely stores the user's app credentials
in your Okta tenant. When the user accesses a SWA app, a browser 
plugin performs a secure form fill to post the user's credentials
to the app.

Okta Integration Network
The Okta Integration Network (OIN) is a catalog of prebuilt app 
integrations provided by Okta. The OIN lets you securely implement
SSO for an app without building and maintaining the integration 
yourself.

To integrate an app using the OIN, go to Applications > Applications from the Admin Console.
Then select Browse App Catalog.

-------Configure SAML SSO-----------
Security Assertion Markup Language (SAML) is an authentication 
protocol that uses encrypted XML assertions to provide federated
single sign-on (SSO) for an app.

How does SAML Work?
SAML uses an XML document (called a SAML assertion) that contains
the authentication and authorization information for a user. When
a user tries to access an application, Okta authenticates the user's
identity. After successful authentication, Okta generates the SAML 
assertion and then redirects the assertion back to the browser. 
The browser forwards the SAML assertion to the Assertion Consumer 
Service (ACS) URL, which is the login URL for the app.


There are two ways to initiate a SAML flow:
•In an IdP-initiated flow, the user attempts to sign in to Okta. 
Okta authenticates the user's credentials and signs them into their 
End-User Dashboard. When the user attempts to access the app from their
dashboard, Okta generates the SAML assertion to access the app.

•In an SP-initiated flow, the user attempts to sign in to the 
application. The application sends the authentication request to 
Okta. Okta authenticates the user's credentials and generates the
SAML assertion to access the app.


Integrate a SAML app
When you integrate a SAML app using the OIN, you need to configure
this information:
1 Establish a trust relationship between the application and Okta.
This trust relationship is created by exchanging metadata and 
giving the application a digital certificate from Okta.
The application uses the certificate to validate assertions.
2 Set the ACS URL (login URL) for the app.

Let's look at the steps to integrate Salesforce from the OIN using
SAML. These steps enable an IdP-initiated flow to access Salesforce
from the Okta End-User Dashboard.
1.Add the app integration.
From the app integration catalog, make sure that the app supports SAML
SSO and then select Add Integration.
2.Specify the general settings for the app.
From the General Settings tab, set the basic information for 
the Salesforce app, including the application label, instance
type, and custom domain (if needed). Then select Next.
3.Set the sign-on method to SAML for the app.
From the Sign-On Options tab, set the sign-on method to SAML 2.0.
At the bottom of the page, select Done.
4.Download the metadata file from Okta
From the Sign On tab of the app, scroll down to the SAML Signing
Certificates section. Select Actions > View IdP metadata for the
active certificate. From the new browser tab containing the
metadata, right-click anywhere on the screen and select Save
as to save the metadata.xml file.
5.Create the SAML connection in Salesforce.
From the Salesforce setup menu, edit the Single Sign-On Settings
to enable SAML. Select New from Metadata File and open the
metadata.xml that you downloaded from Okta. Then select Create to
add the connection. You can change the Name and API Name to 
something more readable and select Save.
6.Set the ACS URL (login URL) for the app.


----------Configure OIDC SSO--------------
The OpenID Connect (OIDC) protocol extends the Open Authorization 2.0 (OAuth 2.0) protocol with user authentication functionality and provides federated single sign-on (SSO) for an app.
OIDC specifies the authentication process between an application—also known as the client or service provider (SP)—and an identity provider (IdP). In this case, Okta is the IdP.
OAuth 2.0 specifies the authorization process for an authenticated user to access a protected resource through an API server.

How do OIDC and OAuth 2.0 work?

OIDC uses an ID Token to hold identification information and prove that the end user has been authenticated. When an end user attempts to sign in to an application, Okta authenticates their identity. After successful authentication, the Okta authorization server mints the ID Token and returns it to the application.
OAuth 2.0 uses an Access Token to hold authorization information and prove the application has been authorized with specific scopes needed to access certain resources. After successful authentication, the Okta authorization server mints the Access Token and returns it to the application. The resource server uses the Access Token to validate a user's level of authorization and access.

OAuth 2.0 uses an Access Token to hold authorization information and prove the application has been authorized with specific scopes needed to access certain resources. After successful authentication, the Okta authorization server mints the Access Token and returns it to the application. The resource server uses the Access Token to validate a user's level of authorization and access.

Integrate an OIDC app
Before integrating with an OIDC app, you need to configure an authorization server with the needed OAuth scopes, claims, and access policies. Note that you can also use the default authorization server in Okta.

When you integrate an OIDC app using the OIN, you need to configure these settings:

1 In Okta, set the redirect URI and initiate login URI for the application. Note that Okta sends the authentication response and ID token to the redirect URI.

2 In the application, set the client ID and secr
