----------SECTION TWO-----------

GDL Graduated Driver Licensing: Level One Learner’s Permit (This is for Individuals Between 16 and 18 years old) 
-Must be at least 16 years old and less than 18 years old
-Must present a Delaware Driver Education Certificate (Blue/White Certificate) as proof that you passed a certified Delaware Driver Education Course
-GDL program applications must be signed by a sponsor. The sponsor is held jointly liable with the GDL applicant for any damages resulting from the GDL applicant's negligence
-The sponsor may withdraw their endorsement at any time until the minor reaches age 18 or the IEP Individualized Education Program GDL applicant has completed 12 months of the GDL program
-permit holder and all passengers, must wear a safety belt
-permit holder shall not operate a motor vehicle while using a cellular telephone or any other 
-No passengers other than an adult supervisor and one other passenger can be in the vehicle during the entire first 12 months of valid driving authority
-When under mandatory supervision, a permit holder must be accompanied in the front seat by a licensed parent, guardian, or sponsor- approved driver aged 25+ with at least 5 years of Class D license experience,no other person can occupy the front seat
-After the first six months of valid Level One Learner's Permit driving authority
   	The permit holder must be supervised at all times
   	The sponsor must certify 50 driving hours, including 10 at night, and submit it to the Department of Education after six months.
-After the first six months of valid Level One Learner's Permit driving authority
   	The permit holder may drive unsupervised between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m
	The permit holder may drive unsupervised between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. only for church, work, or school activities; otherwise,supervision is required.
	Only the supervisor, one passenger, or immediate family (if supervised) are allowed; in the second six months of unsupervised driving, only one passenger is permitted
	Violating Level One Learner's Permit restrictions results in a 2-month suspension for the first offense and 4 months for subsequent offenses.
	The GDL Level One Permit converts to a Class D license after 12 months of valid driving, excluding any suspension periods, which must be made up with additional driving and testing.

Requirements For First Time Applicants Over Age 18 , Temporary Instruction Permit (Learner’s Permit)
-A learner's permit, valid for 12 months, allows practice driving with a licensed driver aged 21+ after passing eye and knowledge exams, paying the fee, and waiting 10 days before taking the road exam.

Name Change
-Within 30 days after legally changing your name, you must appear in person at the DMV to change the name on your driver license or identification card. 
Address Change
-After changing your Delaware address, you have 30 days to notify both the Vehicle registration and Driver License Sections of the Division of Motor Vehicles

LICENSE REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION
Driving privilege may be suspended or revoked The period of the suspension or revocation varies with the type of offense(s) committed. 
-A fee of $50.00 must be paid to reinstate a suspended license
-A $200.00 fee is charged to reinstate a revoked license

Mandatory Revocations
• Driving while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs.
• Hit-and-run driving involving death or injury to another person.
• Attempting to flee from a police officer after having received a visual or audible signal to stop your vehicle.
• Three convictions for reckless driving in a period of 12 consecutive months.
• Contributing to the death of anyone by operating a vehicle.
• The crime of assault in which a death occurs from operating a vehicle.
• Using a motor vehicle in committing any serious crime.
• Making a false statement or using fraudulent information.
• Underage possession/consumption of alcohol by persons under 21 years of age.

Habitual Offender Revocation
	After an accumulation of certain types of traffic violation convictions, the driver may be declared a habitual offender and their license may be revoked for up to five years.
	Any combination of the above offenses and lesser offenses, such as speeding, that result in 10 convictions in three years may convict you as a habitual offender.
1. Manslaughter.
2. Use of a motor vehicle in the commission of a felony.
3. Driving while under the influence of alcohol or drugs.
4. Driving without a license.
5. Driving during suspension or revocation.
6. Reckless driving.
7. Failing to stop at the scene of a crash.
8. Failing to identify yourself at the scene of a crash.
9. Making a false statement to the Division of Motor Vehicles.
10. Violation of an occupational license.
11. Failing to stop on the command of a police officer.


Suspension Of A Driver License
1. Has committed any offense for which a license suspension is mandatory.
2. Has by reckless or unlawful operation of a motor vehicle contributed to a crash resulting in injury or death to any person or caused serious property damage.
3. Is incompetent to drive a motor vehicle for serious medical or mental conditions.
4. Has committed a serious violation of motor vehicle laws.
5. Has driven a motor vehicle without the consent of its owner.
6. Has issued a non-collectible payment to the Division.
7. Racing (speed exhibition).
8. Spinning wheels.
9. Turfing (causing destruction to grass, yards, property, etc.).
10. Failing to answer a court summons in any state.
11. Has violated any of the licensing provision of the Delaware Code including:
	• Use of fictitious, suspended, revoked or borrowed driver license.
	• Loaning a driver license to another person.
	• Failure to surrender a suspended or revoked license.
	• Giving a fictitious name or address or making a false statement in applying for a license.
	• Unlawful manufacture or possession of a false insurance document.
	• Driving an uninsured motor vehicle or driving without insurance card in possession.
	• Passing a stopped school bus.
	• Altering a driver license or using a fraudulent license.
	• Failure to pay child support.
	• Failure to surrender license plate after cancelling insurance on a vehicle.

DRIVER IMPROVEMENT PROBLEM DRIVER PROGRAM
The Driver Improvement Program identifies problem drivers, offers training to change behavior, and imposes sanctions for repeated offenses.

Approved Behavioral Modification/Attitudinal-Driving Courses
Approved agencies offer an 8-hour driving course in all counties for $100. Completion is reported electronically to the DMV within 48 hours.

Delaware Point System
Violation				Description						Points
Speeding				1 – 9 miles per hour (mph) over posted limit		2
Speeding				10 – 14 mph over posted limit				4
Speeding				15 – 19 mph over posted limit				5
Speeding				20 mph or more over posted limit			5 *
Reckless Driving	 									6
Passing a Stopped School Bus	 								6 *
Operation of a Vehicle Causing Death	 							6 *
Aggressive Driving	 									6
Disregarding Stop Sign or Red Light	 							3
Other Moving Violations (contained in Chapters 27,41,42 of Title 21)				2
* May result in additional actions including suspension

Calculated Points	Action Item
	8		The Division of Motor Vehicles sends the driver an advisory letter.
	12		Drivers must complete a behavior modification/attitudinal-driving course  within 90 days or face a mandatory 2-month suspension.
	14		Mandatory 4-month license suspension. *
	16		Mandatory 6-month license suspension. *
	18		Mandatory 8-month license suspension. *
	20		Mandatory 10-month license suspension. *
	22		Mandatory 12-month license suspension. *
* To become eligible for reinstatement, the driver must complete or have completed a behavior modification/attitudinal driving course within the previous two years, as of the time of reinstatement.

Calculated points
Points are fully credited for 12 months from the violation date. After 12 months, they are credited at half value for the next 12 months. Actions depend on total points within a 24-month period after the offense.

Point Credit
A speeding violation of 1 to 14 mph over the posted speed limit may not be assessed points, IF
-It is the first violation within any 3-year period; and
-The ticket is paid through the Voluntary Assessment Center or Alderman’s Court recorded as “guilty mail in” or through an online payment.
Only applies to Class D license holders; CDL(commercial driving license) holders will receive points.
Completing an approved defensive driving course earns a 3-point credit for future DMV penalties only to certain circumstances but doesn't reduce overall points for employment or insurance reviews. The credit is valid for three years.

Serious Speeding Violations
-Advisory letters are sent to the driver when convicted for speeding 20-24 MPH over the posted speed limit
-A driver faces a 1-month suspension for driving 25 MPH over the speed limit, with an additional month added for every 5 MPH over that.
 Drivers going 25-29 MPH over may take a driving course instead of suspension, but speeding 30+ MPH over results in mandatory suspension.
-One-year suspension when convicted of driving 50 mph or more over the posted speed limit or driving 100 mph on a highway. 
To become eligible for reinstatement, the driver must complete or have completed a behavior modification/attitudinal-driving course within the previous two years

Child Support Delinquency
A driver's license may be suspended for owing $1,000+ in child support arrears and being 30+ days delinquent, per Title 13 Delaware Code Section 516. The suspension lasts until a release is issued and received by the DMV.

Occupational License
The Division may issue an occupational license during suspension for extreme hardship.
-Not issued if the driver is suspended/revoked for other Title 21 convictions.
-Not issued if the driver had:
	Two prior suspensions under this policy in the last three years.
	An occupational license in the past 12 months.
-Not issued during the first month of suspension.
-Not issued if points reach 15+ in 24 months, until points drop below 15.


Driving During Suspension Or Revocation
Driving during suspension or revocation extends the suspension by up to one year. No driving is allowed during the initial or extended period, and any issued driving authority must be surrendered.


Aggressive Driving
Delaware’s aggressive driving law targets high-risk drivers to prevent crashes. Aggressive driving includes offenses like speeding, unsafe lane changes, and failure to yield. 
Conviction for three or more offenses in continuous conduct results in fines of $100-$300 for the first offense and mandatory driving course completion within 90 days. 
Failure to attend leads to license suspension.


Defensive Driving Courses
Completing an approved defensive driving course earns a 3-point DMV credit for future penalties but doesn't reduce existing points or affect employment/insurance reviews. The credit is valid for three years.

IMPAIRED DRIVING
Drinking And Driving
	Alcohol content is the same in a 12-ounce beer, 5-ounce wine, or 1.5-ounce spirit. Driving after drinking risks fines, license loss, higher insurance, and jail.
Drinking And Blood Alcohol Concentration
-Blood alcohol concentration (BAC) measures alcohol in the blood as a percentage. Two ounces of alcohol consumed in one hour, regardless of drink type, results in similar BAC. A lighter person reaches a higher BAC with less alcohol.
-In Delaware, a BAC of .08+ or any illicit drug proves a driver is under the influence. Drivers can still be charged with a BAC under .08, and refusal of chemical testing may result in license revocation.
-In Delaware, underage alcohol consumption or possession can lead to license revocation. A .02+ BAC for underage drivers results in revocation, and a DUI conviction can revoke their license until age 21.
-Commercial drivers who refuse a BAC test or have a BAC of .04+ will be disqualified for one year, with a lifetime ban for a second offense.
 	CDL holders convicted of DUI in a non-commercial vehicle face a one-year disqualification, with a lifetime ban for a second conviction.
-If You Drink, When Can You Drive
	Alcohol reaches your brain in 20-40 minutes. Even one drink can impair driving. Two or more drinks may lead to arrest. Time is the only way to sober up; coffee, air, exercise, and showers won't help.

Distracted Driving
Driving instructors estimate that a driver makes 200 decisions for every mile of driving
If you are doing any of the following while driving, you may be doing more things than you can manage safely
• Eating, drinking, or smoking.
• Changing the radio, CD, or music on your electronic device.
• Shaving, putting on make-up, or other personal grooming tasks.
• Engaging in intense, complicated emotional conversations on cell phone or with passengers.
• Reading a road map, newspaper, or taking notes.
• Focusing attention on children or pets.
• Retrieving unsecured cargo or objects.
• Driving an unfamiliar vehicle without first adjusting the mirrors and seat, selecting entertainment options, and locating the lights, turn signals, and windshield wipers.
• Talking or texting using a cell phone.
• Reading or responding to email or other communications via laptop, electronic devices, or other PDA devices.
• Taking a selfie.

Drowsy Driving
Driving for long distances may make you drowsy or unaware of what is happening. “Highway Hypnosis” commonly refers to the state of being unaware of surroundings. 
It is caused by monotony—the sound of the wind, the tires, and the steady hum of the engine.

Delaware Specific Penalties And Procedures
The police will confiscate the driver's license at arrest (except for out-of-state drivers) and issue a 15-day temporary license. The driver has 15 days to request an administrative hearing.

Probable cause
* 3 months for 1st offense
* 12 months for 2nd offense
• 18 months for 3rd offense or more

Refused chemical test
* 12 months for 1st offense
  18 months for 2nd offense
  24 months for 3rd or more offense


Driving Under The Influence (DUI) Penalties For A First Offense
Loss of license by DMV
• 12 months for BAC less than .15 or for drugs.
• 18 months for BAC between .15 and .19.
• 24 months for BAC .20 or greater or refusal to submit to a chemical test.Sanctions by Court
• Fine: $500.00 to $1,500.00 and/or
• Sentence: Imprisonment for up to 12 months.

DUI Penalties For Second Offense
Loss of license by DMV
• 18 months for BAC less than .15 or drugs.
• 24 months for BAC between .15 and .19.
• 30 months for BAC .20 or greater, or refusal to submit to a chemical test.

Sanctions by Court
• Fine: $750.00 to $2,500.00 and
• Sentence: Imprisonment for a minimum of 60 days and up to 18 months. 
If offender satisfies eligibility criteria and participate in the Court of Common Pleas DUI Treatment Program, the Court may suspend the minimum sentence upon successful completion of the program.

DUI Penalties For Third Offense
Loss of license by DMV
• 24 months for BAC less than .15 or drugs.
• 30 months for BAC between .15 and .19.
• 36 months for BAC .20 or greater, or refusal to submit to a chemical test.
Sanctions by Court
• Third DUI Offense: Class G Felony– occurring any time after two prior offenses.
• Fine: Up to $5,000.00 and.
• Sentence: Imprisonment not less than one year nor more than two years.

DUI Penalties For Fourth Offense
Loss of license by DMV
• 60 months for all fourth offense convictions.
Sanctions by Court
• Fourth DUI Offense: Class E Felony – occurring any time after three prior offenses.
• Fine: Up to $7,000.00.
• Sentence: Imprisonment not less than two years nor more than five years.

DUI Penalties For Fifth Offense
Loss of license by DMV
• 60 months for all fifth offense convictions
Sanctions by Court
• Fifth DUI Offense: Class E Felony.
• Fine: Up to $10,000.00 and
• Sentence: Imprisonment not less than three years nor more than five years. 

DUI Penalties For Sixth Offense
Loss of license by DMV
• 60 months for all sixth offense convictions.
Sanctions by Court
• Sixth DUI Offense: Class D Felony.
• Fine: Up to $10,000.00 and
• Sentence: Imprisonment not less than four years nor more than eight years.

DUI Penalties For Seventh Offense
Loss of license by DMV
• 60 months for all seventh or greater offense convictions.
Sanctions by Court
• Seventh or greater DUI Offense: Class C Felony.
• Fine: Up to $15,000.00.
• Sentence: Imprisonment not less than five years nor more than fifteen years

------SECTION THREE-------
page 59
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT, TITLES, REGISTRATION, AND INSURANCE Required Equipment 

Using Headlights
Delaware law requires your headlights (not parking lights) to be:
• On when driving after sunset or before sunrise.
• On any other time you cannot see beyond 1000 feet.
• On any time you use your windshield wipers.
• Switched to low beams 500 feet before meeting another vehicle or
when within 200 feet of the vehicle you are following.


HOW TO TITLE/REGISTER YOUR VEHICLE

Step 1 – Liability Insurance, Financial Responsibility And Penalty
	New residents must title/register their vehicles within 60 days after becoming a
	Delaware resident. State law requires changes of address to be reported to the
	Division of Motor Vehicles within 30 days.

	No copies of insurance or laminated insurance cards will be accepted.
	Third party faxes will not be accepted.
	The penalty for operating an uninsured vehicle is a fine not less than $1,500.00 nor
	more than $2,000.00 and mandatory suspension of driver license and/or driving
	privileges for six months. For each subsequent offense occurring within three years of
	a former offense, the fine shall be not less than $3,000.00 nor more than $4,000.00.
	Providing false proof of insurance will result in an additional fine of $500.00 and/
	or 30 days in jail and suspension of driver license for six months.

	OWNERS CANCELLING INSURANCE FOR ANY REASON MUST FIRST SURRENDER
	THEIR VALID LICENSE PLATE TO THE DIVISION. FAILURE TO SURRENDER A VALID
	LICENSE PLATE PRIOR TO INSURANCE CANCELLATION WILL RESULT IN FINES

	The Division of Motor Vehicles randomly audits for proof of insurance on active
	registrations. The penalty for being uninsured is $100.00 for 1-30 days and an
	additional $5.00 per day until insurance is obtained, tags are surrendered, or the
	registration expires. In addition, suspensions are imposed on the registration of all
	owners who fail to respond to the request. Once suspended, reinstatement fees
	are $50.00 per registration.

Step 2 – Vehicle Inspection
	The second step in obtaining a Delaware vehicle title/
	registration is to have your motor vehicle inspected
	at any of the four DMV locations

Step 3 – Title
	The third step in obtaining a vehicle registration is to complete an application for
	a Delaware title and registration.
	The registration fee is $40.00 for one year or $80.00 for two years for all
	passenger vehicles. You have the option to register for one or two years. The
	Division recommends that you renew your registration for two years.

Change Of Address
If you change your address within Delaware, you have thirty (30) days in which to
notify both the Vehicle Services and Driver License Sections of the DMV

Change Of Name
If you change your name, you have thirty (30) days in which to apply for a new registration
card and title. This may be done by visiting an office of the Division


SECTION FOUR
RULES OF THE ROAD
	Right-Of-Way
	Motor vehicle laws of Delaware and other states do not give anyone the right-ofway.
 	The law describes who is to yield the right-of-way.

	Understanding Traffic Signals
	Remember The Four Rules
	1. RED — Stop
	2. YELLOW — Prepare to stop
	3. GREEN — Proceed with caution
	4. Arrows apply to only the direction indicated

	Steady Red Light
	Stop. You must stop at the stop line, before the crosswalk, or before
	entering the intersection should no stop line or crosswalk be present.
	Right turns on red are permissible after full stop, except when
	prohibited by a posted sign or a steady red arrow is displayed. Left
	turns on red are permissible after full stop from a one-way street to
	another one-way street unless prohibited by a posted sign or a steady
	red arrow is displayed. Make turns with caution, when safe to do so

	Steady Yellow Light
	This means that the signal is changing from green to red; prepare
	to stop. If you are too close to stop safely, continue through the
	intersection with care.

	Steady Green Light
	Proceed with caution. When it is safe to proceed, you may enter the
	intersection to go straight ahead or turn unless a sign or additional
	signal prohibits the turn. You must yield to pedestrians and vehicles
	already in the intersection or adjacent crosswalk. When you turn,
	you must be especially careful of pedestrians and oncoming traffic.

	Flashing Red Light
	Flashing red light means the same as a stop sign. You must come to
	a complete stop. Proceed only when safe.

	Flashing Yellow Light
	Flashing yellow light means slow down, be more aware, and
	proceed with caution. Be careful of crossing intersection traffic,
	controlled by a flashing red.

	Dark Traffic Signals
	In the event that traffic signals are in place and no lighted indication
	is visible to an approaching driver, the approaching driver shall
	reduce speed and prepare to yield to other vehicles that are in or
	approaching the intersection.

Arrows
The difference between round color lenses and arrows is that arrows apply only to
a specific direction, while round lenses apply to all directions. If you know the four
rules on the preceding page, the information provided below will be easy for you.

Steady Red Arrow
A full stop is required when a steady red arrow is displayed. You
may not proceed in the direction of a steady red.

Flashing Red Arrow
Turns are permitted in the direction of a flashing red arrow after
coming to a full stop. The full stop enables drivers to select a safe
gap in the main flow of traffic, and then complete the turn without
waiting for a green signal. Signal may be followed by a steady red
arrow, steady yellow arrow or solid red ball. 


Steady Yellow Arrow
A green arrow display has ended. If you are too close to stop safely,
continue thru the intersection with care

Flashing Yellow Arrow
The movement in the indicated direction is permitted after yielding
to opposing traffic and pedestrians. 

Steady Green Arrow
Proceed with caution in the direction the arrow points. Remember
that you must yield to all pedestrians and vehicles already lawfully
in the intersection. 


Page 70
https://dmv.de.gov/forms/driver_serv_forms/pdfs/dr_frm_manual.pdf

Highway Signs
Highway signs tell you about traffic rules, hazards, where you are, give directions,
and where services are located. The shape and color of these signs give clues to
the type of information they provide. You must know highway signs by their shape
and color, as well as by the words, numbers, or figures on them. 

Page 76
||||||
Page 90

Stopping And Parking Violations
Unless otherwise posted, ordered to do so by a police officer, or to avoid a crash,
you must not stop or park your vehicle in any of the following places even if
someone is left in the car:
• At any place where official signs prohibit such action.
• Whenever a curb is painted yellow or a yellow line is placed at the
edge of a roadway.
• In an intersection, on a crosswalk, or within 20 feet of a crosswalk at
an intersection.
• On a sidewalk.
• In front of a public or private road, driveway, or alley.
• Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
• Within 20 feet of driveway entrance to any fire station or on the
opposite side of the street within 75 feet of an entrance when signs
are posted.

Page 91 speed limits

General Speed Restriction
You must not drive on a Delaware highway at a speed greater than is reasonable
under existing conditions. This means that it is not always lawful to drive as fast as
the posted speed limit. 

Speed Limits
You must not drive any vehicle faster than the speeds listed in this table (refer to
Section Two, License Revocations & Suspensions for penalties under the Delaware
Point System):
Under emergency conditions, the speed limits below may be changed.
The driver must never exceed the posted limit

Minimum Speed
You must not drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede normal and
reasonable movement of traffic, except when necessary for safety or compliance
with the law.
You must obey posted minimum speed limits, except when weather or other
conditions make it unsafe to do so.

Speed Signs
There are two speed signs: speed limit signs and advisory (recommended) speed
signs. Speed limit signs have black letters and numerals on a white rectangular
background and are the legal allowable limits. 
Advisory speed signs have black
letters on a yellow background and often are shown under a warning sign. Advisory
speed signs are posted along portions of highways to warn you that conditions may
often make it unsafe to drive faster.

Your Responsibility As A Driver
-Be alert for pedestrians walking along or crossing the road; lightly tap
horn if necessary. Sounding the horn is not considered a substitute
for yielding to pedestrians.
-Drivers should be alert for individuals and must yield the right-of-way
to pedestrians who are hearing impaired or have physical disabilities
that require use of canes, crutches, walkers, guide dogs/service
animals, wheelchairs, or motorized scooters. These individuals may
have difficulty detecting oncoming traffic and may need extra time
to cross the road.
-You must not drive through a pedestrian safety zone or block a
crosswalk.
-You must yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian within a crosswalk,
stopping if necessary.
-You must always stop before reaching a school bus when it is
stopped to load or unload school children, except when you are on
the opposite side of a divided highway having four or more lanes.
-Drive defensively at all times

Who Must Yield To Pedestrians
Pedestrians have the right-of-way:
• When crossing a highway at an intersection and the green light or
walk signal is in their favor.
• When crossing within a marked or unmarked crosswalk.
• When on a sidewalk as it crosses an alley, entrance, or driveway.
• When they are blind and crossing with white canes or guide dogs.

Bicycle Friendly Delaware Act
1. This law requires drivers to change lanes (including when there is a
double yellow line) when passing bicycles if the travel lanes are too
narrow for sharing. Motorists must give bicyclists at least three (3)
feet of room when passing.
2. Motorists are forbidden from honking their horn at bicyclists unless
there is an imminent danger.
3. Bicyclists should ride to the right of the roadway as their safety allows.
4. Bicyclists are now allowed to yield at stop signs, after carefully
looking for other vehicles and no longer required to stop

Bike Box
A bike box is a designated area at the head of a traffic lane at intersections
that provides bicyclists with a safe way to turn and a visible way to get
ahead of traffic. The benefits to a bike box is that it increases the visibility
of bicyclists, helps prevent ‘right-hook’ conflicts with turning vehicles,
provides priority of bicyclists at signalized crossing at major intersections
and bicyclists can avoid breathing exhaust fumes. Pedestrians also benefit
from a bike box as it reduces vehicle encroachment into the crosswalk.

Two-Way Cycle Tracks
A two-way cycle tracks are physically separated cycle tracks that allow
bicycle movement in both directions on one side of the road. A twoway cycle track may be configured as a protected cycle track at street
level with a parking lane or other barrier between the cycle track and the
motor vehicle travel lane

Your Responsibility As A Driver

In order to pass a bicycle safely, the law in Delaware requires that you completely
change lanes, including crossing a double-yellow center line, if the travel lane you
are traveling in is too narrow for the vehicle you are driving and the bicycle you
want to pass to travel safely side by side within the lane. In the unusual case of
very wide travel lanes (wide enough for both your vehicle and a bicycle), the law
permits you to pass a bicycle without changing lanes but requires that you (a)
slow down when doing so and (b) leave a minimum of three feet of clearance at all
times between your vehicle and the bicycle.

If the road you are driving on has only two lanes and you are unable to pass safely
because of lack of visibility and/or oncoming traffic, follow at a safe distance
and wait until it is safe before passing. Allow plenty of clearance after overtaking
a cyclist, before you pull to the right. The cyclist’s speed may be greater than
you realize. It is illegal to blow your horn at a cyclist except in the very narrow
circumstance when you are warning the cyclist of an imminent collision


Sharing The Road With Motorcycles
-Motorcyclists have the same rights and responsibilities on public roadways as
other highway users. While legally everyone must abide by the same traffic laws,
there are special situations and conditions you need to be aware of so you can
share the road safely with those who choose to use two wheels instead of four.

-Left turns in front of an oncoming motorcyclist account for a large percentage of
car/cycle injury-producing crashes. The problem of not seeing the motorcyclist is
twofold: car drivers may fail to pick the cyclist out of the traffic scene, or drivers
may fail to judge the speed of the oncoming motorcycle. The correct behavior
is to look and look again. Make sure you see the motorcycle and know its speed
before you make a left turn.

-Turn signals are not automatically self-canceling on most motorcycles. At times,
the rider may forget to turn the signal off. Before you make a turn in front of a
motorcyclist, be sure the rider is turning and not continuing straight ahead into
your path with a forgotten turn signal still blinking

-Following distance behind the motorcyclist should be at a two second count when
traveling at speeds under 40 mph and a four second count for speeds above
40 mph. Following too closely may make the rider nervous causing the rider’s
attention to be distracted from the road and traffic ahead. Motorcycles can stop
quicker, so you need to follow at a safe distance. If the roadway is slippery or wet,
increase your following distance

-Never move into the same lane
alongside a motorcycle even if the lane is wide and the cyclist is riding far to one
side. It is not only illegal, it is extremely hazardous.

Sharing The Road With A Truck
Whether you’re sharing the road with a car, truck, bus, or other large vehicle, it’s
important for safety’s sake to obey traffic laws, abide by the rules of the road, and
drive defensively. Are there any special rules for sharing the road with a truck?
Yes! Here are some suggestions from professional truck drivers.

-Passing
When passing a truck, first check to your front and rear and then move into the
passing lane only if it is clear and you are in a legal passing zone. If needed, let the
truck driver know you are passing by blinking your headlights, especially at night.

Complete your pass as quickly as possible, and don’t stay alongside the other
vehicle.
If the driver blinks his lights after you pass, it’s a signal that it is clear to pull back
in. Be sure to move back only when you can see the front of the truck in your rearview mirror. After you pass a truck, maintain your speed.

When a truck passes you, you can help the truck driver by keeping to the far side
of your lane. You’ll make it easier for the truck driver if you reduce speed slightly.
In any event, don’t speed up while the truck is passing. After passing, the truck
driver will signal to let you know that the truck will be returning to your lane.

When you meet a truck coming from the opposite direction, keep as far as possible
to the side to avoid a sideswipe crash and to reduce the wind turbulence between
the two vehicles. Remember that the turbulence pushes the vehicles apart. It does
not suck them together.


Near A Truck – No-Zone
In general, trucks take slightly longer than cars to stop because of their size.
If you’re near a truck, try to stay out of its “blind spots” also called the “No-Zone”
as depicted here:
THE KEY TO SAFER HIGHWAYS: KNOW THE NO-ZONE
The No-Zone represents danger areas around trucks where crashes are more likely
to occur.
• Passing - When cars cut in too soon after passing, then abruptly
slow down, truck drivers are forced to compensate with little time or
room to spare. Because it takes longer to pass a large vehicle, you
should maintain a consistent speed when passing, and be sure you
can see the cab of the truck in your rear-view mirror before pulling
in front.
• Backing Up - When a truck is backing up, it sometimes must
temporarily block the street to maneuver its trailer accurately.
Never pass close behind a truck that is in the process of backing up.
Remember, most trailers are 8.5 feet wide and can completely hide
objects that suddenly come between them and a loading area. So if
you try to pass behind the truck, you enter a (No-Zone) blindspot for
you and the truck driver.
• Rear Blindspots - Unlike cars, trucks have deep blindspots directly
behind them. Avoid tailgating in this No-Zone. The truck driver
can’t see your car in this position, and your own view of traffic
flow is severely reduced. Following too closely greatly increases
your chance of a rear-end collision with a truck. Allow at least four
seconds between your vehicle and the truck, and remember that you
too cannot see, and plan ahead if you follow too closely
• Side Blindspots - Trucks have much larger blindspots on both sides
of their vehicles than passenger vehicles. When you drive in these
blindspots (No-Zone) for any length of time, the truck driver can’t
see you. If a commercial driver needs to change lanes quickly for any
reason, a serious crash could occur with the vehicle in the No-Zone.
• Wide Turns - Truck drivers sometimes need to swing wide to the
left in order to safely negotiate a right turn. They cannot see cars
directly behind them. Cutting in between the commercial vehicle
and the curb or shoulder to the right increases the possibility of a
crash.

Backing Crashes
Sixty-six percent of all commercial vehicle crashes are while backing; therefore,
never try to cross behind a truck which is preparing to back up. Often when a truck
driver is preparing to back the truck from a roadway into a loading area, there is
no choice but to temporarily block the roadway. It is here that some drivers and
pedestrians attempt to pass behind the truck rather than wait the few seconds for
the truck to complete its maneuver. In passing close behind the truck, the driver or
pedestrian enters the truck’s blind spot, and a crash may occur.

SECTION FIVE
DRIVING SKILLS AND SAFETY TIPS
No driver manual can teach you how to operate a vehicle or be a safe driver.
Driving requires skills you can only gain through instruction and practice.
BEFORE YOU DRIVE
Your safety and that of the public depends a lot on what you do before driving,
including adjusting the seat and mirrors, using safety belts, checking your vehicle,
maintaining a clear view, and securing items in and on the vehicle.

Use Safety Belts
A law enforcement officer may pull a
vehicle over if they see an unrestrained
or improperly restrained occupant inside.
Putting the shoulder belt under your arm
or behind you can result in serious injury;
and, because it is not considered proper
safety belt use

Use Child Restraints
Delaware law requires all children under
age eight or under 66 lbs. to be properly
restrained in a child safety seat or booster
seat. Additionally, all children ages eight
and older or 66 lbs. or more must be
properly restrained in a safety belt. This
is a primary enforcement law, which
means officers can pull a vehicle over
if they see an unrestrained child inside.
A child under the age of 12 or under 65
inches in height should not occupy the
front passenger seat of a vehicle that is
equipped with a passenger-side airbag.

Birth - 12 Months: Children under the age of 1 should always ride in a rear-facing
car seat. There are different types of rear-facing car seats: infant-only seats can
only be used rear-facing; convertible and all-in-1 car seats typically have higher
height and weight limits for the rear-facing position, allowing you to keep your
child rear-facing for a longer period of time. 

1 - 3 Years: Keep your child rear-facing for as long as possible. It’s the best way to
keep them safe. Your child should remain in a rear-facing car seat until they reach
the top height or weight limit allowed by your car seat’s manufacturer. Once the
rear-facing car seat is outgrown, your child is ready to travel in a forward-facing
car seat with a harness and tether.

Other tips:
• Never place a rear-facing child in front of a passenger airbag.
• Shoulder straps should fit snugly and you should not be able to
pinch excess webbing of the straps between your fingers when you
try to pinch it at the child’s collarbone.
• The chest clip should be even with the child’s arm pits.
• The safest place to install your child’s safety seat, when possible, is
the center rear seating position.
• Never try to hold a child on your lap unrestrained. At 30 mph, a 10-lb.
baby in a crash becomes a force of 300 lbs., which no one can hold.
The safest place for them is in an appropriate child safety seat.
• Always read your vehicle owner’s manual and the instructions that
come with your child-restraint device

Warning! When it’s hot outside, do not leave children or animals unattended.
On a hot summer day the interior of a car can get dangerously hot. One study found
that with the windows up and the temperature outside at 94 degrees, the inside of a
car could be 122 degrees in just half an hour or 132 degrees after an hour


Bad Information
Some people still have “bad information” about using safety belts. For example
“Safety belts can trap you inside a car.”
“Safety belts are good on long trips, but I do not need them if I am driving around
town.”
“Some people are thrown clear in a crash and walk away with hardly a scratch.”
“If I get hit from the side, I am better off being thrown across the car; away from
the crash point.”
“At slow speeds, I can brace myself.”


An individual’s constitutional and other legal rights during a traffic stop
In accordance with 11 Del. C. §1902 an individual must provide their name, address
and an explanation as to why they are driving on the roadway and where they are
going. Similarly, passengers in a vehicle must also provide their information and/
or exit the vehicle, if requested to do so by the officer. An individual may ask the
officer to identify them self and the agency that employs them.
An individual’s vehicle may be searched on-scene if consent is provided to the
officer to do so, if the officer believes they have probable cause to do so, or as
part of an inventory assessment of a vehicle that is being towed. During roadside
investigations a person does not have a right to an attorney; however, that right
will present itself later in the process. 

Laws regarding questioning and detention by a law-enforcement
officer, proof of identity and consequences for failure to comply
No person shall drive a motor vehicle on a public street or highway of this State
if they do not have a license to operate it. Failure to have the proper license or
endorsement may lead to, at a minimum, fines and/or the loss of driving privileges.
A person who fails to provide identification or who fails to explain their actions
to the satisfaction of the officer, may be detained, further questioned, and
investigated. A detention does not mean a person is under arrest. At the end of
the detention period, which may not exceed two hours, the person will either be
released, or arrested and charged with a crime. You may refer to 11 Del. C. §1902,
21 Del. C. §2701 and 21 Del. C. §2721 for additional information. 



What to Do and Expect When Stopped by Law Enforcement
Law enforcement officers conduct traffic stops because they observe a traffic
violation or are conducting a police investigation. Being stopped by a law
enforcement officer can be a stressful experience but knowing what to do during
the stop will help ensure your safety, the safety of other motorists, and the safety
of the officer. When you see emergency lights behind you, stay calm, activate
your turn signal, and pull off or to the side of the roadway as soon and safely
as possible. When pulling over for an emergency vehicle, movements should be
made to the right side of the roadway, whenever possible. Turn off the ignition and radio, and stay in
your vehicle unless directed by the officer to exit. Keep your hands on the steering
wheel so they are easily observable. Ask your passengers to remain calm and to
stay in the vehicle while keeping their hands in plain view as well. Give the officer
your full attention. Cell phones and mobile devices should not be used by you or
any of your passengers. Do not make sudden moves or search for your driver’s
license or vehicle documents – wait for the officer to give you instructions. If you
have a weapon(s) in the vehicle, inform the officer upon first contact. If it’s
nighttime, the officer may direct a spotlight at your vehicle once stopped. To assist with visibility, turn on your interior lights as soon as you stop to help the
officer see inside your vehicle.


BASIC DRIVING

Starting
Check the vehicle’s owner manual for how to best start the vehicle. Make sure
the parking brake is on before you start the vehicle. If the vehicle has a manual
transmission, it must not be in gear, and in some vehicles, the clutch must be
depressed. For a vehicle that has an automatic transmission, you must put the shift
selector in “park.

Accelerating
Accelerate gradually and smoothly. Trying to start too fast can cause the drive
wheels to spin, particularly on slippery surfaces, and cause the vehicle to slide.
With a manual-shift vehicle, practice using the clutch and accelerator so that the
engine does not over-rev or stall when shifting between gears.

Steering
Both hands should be placed on opposite sides of the steering wheel (e.g., left
hand between 8 and 10 o’clock and right hand between 2 and 4 o’clock). This 
position is comfortable, and on high speed roads
it allows you to make turns without taking your
hands off the wheel.
Be sure to look well down the road and on both
sides of the road, not just at the road in front of
your vehicle.Look for traffic situations where you
will need to steer before you get to them. This
way, you have time to steer smoothly and safely.
When turning sharp corners, turn the steering
wheel using the “hand-over-hand” technique.
When you complete a turn, straighten out the
steering wheel by hand. Letting it slip through
your fingers could be dangerous.	


Speeding
The best way not to speed is to know how fast you are going. Check the
speedometer often. People are not very good at judging how fast they are going.
It is easy to be traveling much faster than you think. This is especially true when
you leave high speed roads and are driving on much slower local roads.
Follow the speed limit signs. They are there for your safety.

Stopping
Try to avoid panic stops by seeing events well in advance. By slowing down or
changing lanes, you may not have to stop at all, and if you do, you can make a
more gradual and safer stop.

In emergency or slippery
conditions without AntiLock Braking System, all
wheels lock; car skids
and is unsteerable.

In emergency or slippery
conditions with Anti-Lock
Braking System, wheels
don’t lock; car is stable
and remains steerable.

Braking
Newer automobiles and trucks are equipped with Anti-Lock Brake Systems (ABS),
which prevent vehicles from locking wheels and skidding in emergency or slippery
conditions. With ABS you should brake as hard as possible and, if necessary, steer
to avoid crashing. Without ABS, you should brake as hard as possible without
locking the wheels
Newer automobiles and trucks are equipped with Anti-Lock Brake Systems (ABS),
which prevent vehicles from locking wheels and skidding in emergency or slippery
conditions. With ABS you should brake as hard as possible and, if necessary, steer
to avoid crashing. Without ABS, you should brake as hard as possible without
locking the wheels.

Do not drive with head or earphones that cover or go in both ears. This is illegal
in Delaware and many other states because it makes it hard to hear emergency
horns or sirens

 Safer drivers tend to look at least 10 seconds ahead of their vehicle. How
far is this? It is the distance that your vehicle will travel in 10 seconds.
In the city, 10 seconds is about one block. When you drive in city traffic, you should
try to look at least one block ahead. On the highway, 10 seconds is about four city
blocks or a quarter of a mile.

Do you know how many seconds you are looking ahead? Here is how to figure how
far ahead you are looking.
1. Find a non-moving object like a sign or telephone pole near the road
about as far ahead as you are looking.
2. Start counting: one-one-thousand, two-one-thousand, three-onethousand, etc., until you reach the object.
3. The number of seconds you have counted is the number of seconds
ahead that you were looking.

Intersections – Intersections are any place where traffic merges or crosses. They
include: cross streets, side streets, driveways, and shopping center or parking lot
entrances. Before you enter an intersection, look to both the left and right for
approaching vehicles and/or crossing pedestrians. If stopped, look to both the left
and right just before you start moving. Look across the intersection before you
start to move to make sure the path is clear all the way through the intersection,
and you will not block it if you have to stop.
Before you turn left across oncoming traffic, look for a safe gap in the traffic. Look
to the street you are turning onto to make sure that no vehicles or pedestrians are
in your path, leaving you stranded in the path of oncoming traffic. Look one more
time in the direction of oncoming traffic before you turn.
Before turning right, make sure that there is no traffic approaching from your left
and no oncoming traffic turning left into your path. Do not begin your turn without
checking for pedestrians crossing where you will be turning. You may turn right on
red unless prohibited. You may also turn left from a one-way street onto another
one-way street unless prohibited.
Do not rely on traffic signals or signs to tell you that no one will be crossing in front
of you. Some drivers do not obey traffic signals or signs. At an intersection, look
left and right, even if other traffic has a red light or a stop sign. This is especially
important just after the light has turned green. This is when people on the cross
street are most likely to hurry through the intersection before the light changes
to red. Others who may not stop are individuals who have been drinking or other
reckless drivers.
Make sure you can clearly see crossing traffic before entering an intersection. If
you were stopped and your view of a cross street is blocked, edge forward slowly
until you can see. By moving forward slowly, crossing drivers can see the front of
your vehicle before you can see them. This gives them a chance to slow down and
warn you if needed.
Whenever there is a lot of activity along the side of the road, there is a good chance
that someone will cross or enter the road. Therefore, it is very important to look to
the sides when you are near shopping centers and parking lots, construction areas,
busy sidewalks, and playgrounds and school yards.

Railroad crossings – As you approach any railroad crossing, slow down and look
up and down the tracks to make sure a train is not coming. Do not assume that a
train is not coming even if you have never seen one at that crossing before. Always
expect a train. Assuming that a train is not coming is one of the leading causes of
fatalities at railroad crossings. Make sure there is room for your vehicle on the far
side before you cross the tracks. Do not block the crossing.

Look behind - Besides watching traffic ahead of you, you must check traffic
behind you. You need to check more often when traffic is heavy. This is the only
way you will know if someone is following too closely or coming up too fast and
will give you time to do something about it. It is very important to look for vehicles
behind you when you change lanes, slow down, back up, or are driving down a
long or steep hill.


116-150
